Title: https://www.mayoclinic.org/diseases-conditions/pulmonary-fibrosis/symptoms-causes/syc-20353690
Source: www.mayoclinic.org
Date: 2025-02-24
Type: Web Content

Print
Overview
Pulmonary fibrosis
Enlarge image
Close
Pulmonary fibrosis
Pulmonary fibrosis
Pulmonary fibrosis is scarred and thickened tissue around and between the air sacs called alveoli in the lungs, as shown on the right. A healthy lung with healthy alveoli is shown on the left.
Pulmonary fibrosis is a lung disease that occurs when lung tissue becomes damaged and scarred. This thickened, stiff tissue makes it harder for the lungs to work properly. Pulmonary fibrosis worsens over time. Some people can stay stable for a long time, but the condition gets worse faster in others. As it gets worse, people become more and more short of breath.
The scarring that happens in pulmonary fibrosis can be caused by many things. Often, doctors and other healthcare professionals cannot pinpoint what's causing the problem. When a cause cannot be found, the condition is called idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis.
Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis usually occurs in middle-aged and older adults. Sometimes pulmonary fibrosis is diagnosed in children and infants, but this is not common.
The lung damage caused by pulmonary fibrosis cannot be repaired. Medicines and therapies can sometimes help slow down the rate of fibrosis, ease symptoms and improve quality of life. For some people, a lung transplant might be an option.
Pulmonary fibrosis care at Mayo Clinic
Products & Services
A Book: Mayo Clinic Family Health Book
Newsletter: Mayo Clinic Health Letter — Digital Edition
Show more products from Mayo Clinic
Symptoms
Symptoms of pulmonary fibrosis may include:
Shortness of breath.
Dry cough.
Extreme tiredness.
Weight loss that's not intended.
Aching muscles and joints.
Widening and rounding of the tips of the fingers or toes, called clubbing.
How fast pulmonary fibrosis worsens over time and how severe the symptoms are can vary greatly from person to person. Some people become ill very quickly with severe disease. Others have moderate symptoms that worsen more slowly, over months or years.
When symptoms suddenly get worse
In people with pulmonary fibrosis, especially idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis, shortness of breath can suddenly get worse over a few weeks or days. This is called an acute exacerbation. It can be life-threatening. The cause of an acute exacerbation may be another condition or an illness, such as a lung infection. But usually the cause is not known.
When to see a doctor
If you have symptoms of pulmonary fibrosis, contact your doctor or other healthcare professional as soon as possible. If your symptoms get worse, especially if they get worse fast, contact your healthcare team right away.
Request an appointment
There is a problem with
                                information submitted for this request. Review/update the
                                information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
Get the latest lung transplant-related health information from Mayo Clinic
Sign up for free, and receive lung transplant and pulmonary fibrosis content, plus expertise on lung health.
Email
Location
Florida
Minnesota
Error
Select
                                        a location
Error
Email field is required
Error
Include a valid email address
Address 1
Learn more about Mayo Clinic’s use of data.
To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which
                                information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with
                                other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could
                                include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected
                                health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health
                                information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of
                                privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on
                                the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.
Subscribe!
Thank you for subscribing
You will receive the first lung transplant and pulmonary fibrosis email in your inbox shortly. When seeking answers, people often look to experts for clear and accurate information. By subscribing to pulmonary fibrosis and lung transplant content from Mayo Clinic, you have taken an important first step in gaining knowledge and using it for your overall health and well-being.
If you don't receive our email within 5 minutes, check your SPAM folder, then contact us at
newsletters@mayoclinic.com
.
Sorry something went wrong with your subscription
Please, try again in a couple of minutes
Retry
Causes
Pulmonary fibrosis is scarring and thickening of the tissue around and between the air sacs called alveoli in the lungs. These changes make it harder for oxygen to pass into the bloodstream.
Damage to the lungs that results in pulmonary fibrosis may be caused by many different things. Examples include long-term exposure to certain toxins, radiation therapy, some medicines and certain medical conditions. In some cases, the cause of pulmonary fibrosis is not known.
Your work and surroundings
The type of work you do and where you work or live could be the cause or part of the cause for pulmonary fibrosis. Having continuous or repeated contact with toxins or pollutants — substances that harm the quality of water, air or land — can damage your lungs, especially if you do not wear protective gear. Examples include:
Silica dust.
Asbestos fibers.
Hard metal dusts.
Wood, coal and grain dusts.
Mold.
Bird and animal droppings.
Radiation treatments
Some people who receive radiation therapy to the chest, such as for lung or breast cancer, show signs of lung damage months or sometimes years after treatment. How severe the damage is may depend on:
How much of the lung was exposed to radiation.
The total amount of radiation given.
Whether chemotherapy also was used.
Whether there is underlying lung disease.
Medicines
Many medicines can damage the lungs. Some examples include:
Chemotherapy.
Medicines designed to kill cancer cells, such as methotrexate (Trexall, Otrexup, others), bleomycin and cyclophosphamide (Cytoxan), can damage lung tissue.
Heart medicines.
Some medicines used to treat irregular heartbeats, such as amiodarone (Nexterone, Pacerone), may harm lung tissue.
Some antibiotics.
Antibiotics such as nitrofurantoin (Macrobid, Macrodantin) or ethambutol (Myambutol) can cause lung damage.
Anti-inflammatory medicines.
Certain anti-inflammatory medicines such as rituximab (Rituxan) or sulfasalazine (Azulfidine) can cause lung damage.
Medical conditions
Lung damage can also result from a number of conditions, including:
Dermatomyositis,
an inflammatory disease marked by muscle weakness and a skin rash.
Lupus,
a disease that occurs when the body's immune system attacks its own tissues and organs.
Mixed connective tissue disease,
which has a mix of symptoms of different disorders, such as lupus, scleroderma and polymyositis.
Pneumonia,
an infection that inflames the air sacs in one or both lungs.
Polymyositis,
an inflammatory disease that causes muscle weakness on both sides of the body.
Rheumatoid arthritis,
an inflammatory disease that affects joints and other body systems.
Sarcoidosis,
an inflammatory disease that most often affects the lungs and lymph nodes.
Scleroderma,
a group of rare diseases that involve hardening and tightening of the skin as well as problems inside the body.
Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis
Many substances and conditions can lead to pulmonary fibrosis. Even so, in many people, the cause is never found. But risk factors such as smoking or exposure to air pollution could be related to the condition, even if the cause cannot be confirmed. Pulmonary fibrosis with no known cause is called idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis.
Many people with idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis also may have gastroesophageal reflux disease, also called GERD. This condition occurs when acid from the stomach flows back into the esophagus.
GERD
may be a risk factor for idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis or cause the condition to worsen faster. But more studies are needed.
Risk factors
Pulmonary fibrosis has been found in children and infants, but this is not common. Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis is much more likely to affect middle-aged and older adults. Other types of pulmonary fibrosis, such as that caused by connective tissue disease, can occur in younger people.
Factors that can raise your risk of pulmonary fibrosis include:
Smoking.
If you smoke now or used to smoke, you're at a higher risk of pulmonary fibrosis than people who never smoked. People with emphysema are at higher risk, too.
Certain types of work.
You have a higher risk of developing pulmonary fibrosis if you work in mining, farming or construction. The risk also is higher if you have continuous or repeated contact with pollutants known to damage the lungs.
Cancer treatments.
Having radiation treatments to your chest or using certain chemotherapy medicines can raise your risk of pulmonary fibrosis.
Genetics.
Some types of pulmonary fibrosis run in families, so genes may play a role.
Complications
Complications of pulmonary fibrosis may include:
High blood pressure in the lungs.
Called pulmonary hypertension, this type of high blood pressure affects the arteries in the lungs. These are the pulmonary arteries. Stiff and thick arteries may slow down or block blood flow through the lungs. This raises the pressure inside the pulmonary arteries and the lower right heart chamber, called the right ventricle.
Right-sided heart failure.
This serious condition occurs when your heart's right chamber has to pump harder than usual to move blood through partly blocked pulmonary arteries.
Respiratory failure.
This is often the last stage of long-term lung disease. It occurs when blood oxygen levels fall dangerously low.
Lung cancer.
Long-standing pulmonary fibrosis increases your risk of developing lung cancer.
Other lung problems.
As pulmonary fibrosis gets worse over time, it may lead to serious problems such as blood clots in the lungs, a collapsed lung or lung infections.
By Mayo Clinic Staff
Pulmonary fibrosis care at Mayo Clinic
Request an appointment
Diagnosis & treatment
Feb. 15, 2024
Print
Living with pulmonary fibrosis?
Connect with others like you for support and answers to your questions in the
Transplants support group
on Mayo Clinic Connect, a patient community.
Transplants Discussions
Liver disease itching: What helps?
169 Replies
Thu, Feb 20, 2025
chevron-right
This and That and Talk - My Transplant
1678 Replies
Sun, Jan 26, 2025
chevron-right
Anyone shut down their kidney dialysis fistula after transplant?
30 Replies
Sat, Jan 25, 2025
chevron-right
See more discussions
Show references
Raghu G, et al. Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (an update) and progressive pulmonary fibrosis in adults: An official ATS/ERS/JRS/ALAT clinical practice guideline. American Journal of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine. 2022; doi:10.1164/rccm.202202-0399stt.
Broaddus VC, et al., eds. Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. In: Murray and Nadel's Textbook of Respiratory Medicine. 7th ed. Elsevier; 2022. https://www.clinicalkey.com. Accessed April 5, 2023.
Broaddus VC, et al., eds. Pleural fibrosis and unexpandable lung. In: Murray and Nadel's Textbook of Respiratory Medicine. 7th ed. Elsevier; 2022. https://www.clinicalkey.com. Accessed April 5, 2023.
Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute. https://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/health/idiopathic-pulmonary-fibrosis. Accessed April 5, 2023.
Baqir M, et al. Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis and gastroesophageal reflux disease: A population-based, case-control study. Respiratory Medicine. 2021; doi:10.1016/j.rmed.2021.106309.
Strykowski R, et al. Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis and progressive pulmonary fibrosis. Immunology and Allergy Clinics of North America. 2023; doi:10.1016/j.iac.2023.01.010.
Ahmad K, et al. Lung disease-related pulmonary hypertension. Cardiology Clinics. 2022; doi:10.1016/j.ccl.2021.08.005.
Collins BF, et al. Diagnosis and management of fibrotic interstitial lung diseases. Clinics in Chest Medicine. 2021; doi:10.1016/j.ccm.2021.03.008.
Lee JYT, et al. Self-management for pulmonary fibrosis: Insights from people living with the disease and healthcare professionals. Patient Education and Counseling. 2022; doi:10.1016/j.pec.2021.07.005.
Wuyts WA, et al. Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis: Best practice in monitoring and managing a relentless fibrotic disease. Respiration. 2020; doi:10.1159/000504763.
Glass DS, et al. Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis: Current and future treatment. Clinical Respiratory Journal. 2022; doi:10.1111/crj.13466.
Dempsey TM, et al. Pulmonary function tests for the generalist: A brief review. Mayo Clinic Proceedings. 2018; doi:10.1016/j.mayocp.2018.04.009.
Pulmonary rehabilitation. National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute. https://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/health/pulmonary-rehabilitation. Accessed April 5, 2023.
Park Y, et al. Occupational and environmental risk factors of idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Scientific Reports. 2021; doi:10.1038/s41598-021-81591-z.
Jarzebska N, et al. Scarred lung. An update on radiation-induced pulmonary fibrosis. Frontiers in Medicine. 2021; doi:10.3389/frmed.2020.585756.
Broaddus VC, et al., eds. Drug-induced pulmonary disease. In: Murray and Nadel's Textbook of Respiratory Medicine. 7th ed. Elsevier; 2022. https://www.clinicalkey.com. Accessed April 11, 2023.
Table: Substances with toxic pulmonary effects. Merck Manual Professional Version. https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/pulmonary-disorders/interstitial-lung-diseases/drug-induced-pulmonary-disease. Accessed April 11, 2023.
Baqir M (expert opinion). Mayo Clinic. June 16, 2023.
Allscripts EPSi. Mayo Clinic.
Related
Pulmonary fibrosis
Associated Procedures
Bronchoscopy
Chest X-rays
CT scan
Echocardiogram
Lung transplant
Spirometry
Stress test
Show more associated procedures
News from Mayo Clinic
Shortened telomeres heighten risk of serious lung disease
Dec. 16, 2023, 12:00 p.m.  CDT
Products & Services
A Book: Mayo Clinic Family Health Book
Newsletter: Mayo Clinic Health Letter — Digital Edition
Show more products and services from Mayo Clinic
Mayo Clinic in Rochester, Minnesota, Mayo Clinic in Phoenix/Scottsdale, Arizona, and Mayo Clinic in Jacksonville, Florida, have been recognized among the top Pulmonology hospitals in the nation for 2024-2025 by U.S. News & World Report.
Learn more about this top honor
Pulmonary fibrosis
Symptoms
&
causes
Diagnosis
&
treatment
Doctors
&
departments
Care at
Mayo
Clinic
Advertisement
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Advertising & Sponsorship
Policy
Opportunities
Ad Choices
Mayo Clinic Press
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from
Mayo Clinic Press
.
NEW: Mayo Clinic Guide to Better Sleep - Mayo Clinic Press
NEW: Mayo Clinic Guide to Better Sleep
Listen to Health Matters Podcast - Mayo Clinic Press
Listen to Health Matters Podcast
Mayo Clinic on Incontinence - Mayo Clinic Press
Mayo Clinic on Incontinence
The Essential Diabetes Book - Mayo Clinic Press
The Essential Diabetes Book
FREE Mayo Clinic Diet Assessment - Mayo Clinic Press
FREE Mayo Clinic Diet Assessment
Mayo Clinic Health Letter - FREE book - Mayo Clinic Press
Mayo Clinic Health Letter - FREE book
CON-20184359
Patient Care & Health Information
Diseases & Conditions
Pulmonary fibrosis
