Title: https://www.mayoclinic.org/diseases-conditions/cancer/symptoms-causes/syc-20370588
Source: www.mayoclinic.org
Date: 2025-02-24
Type: Web Content

Print
Overview
Cancer refers to any one of a large number of diseases characterized by the development of abnormal cells that divide uncontrollably and have the ability to infiltrate and destroy normal body tissue. Cancer often has the ability to spread throughout your body.
Cancer is the second-leading cause of death in the world. But survival rates are improving for many types of cancer, thanks to improvements in cancer screening, treatment and prevention.
Products & Services
A Book: Live Younger Longer
A Book: Mayo Clinic Family Health Book
Assortment of Pill Aids from Mayo Clinic Store
Newsletter: Mayo Clinic Health Letter — Digital Edition
Show more products from Mayo Clinic
Symptoms
Signs and symptoms caused by cancer will vary depending on what part of the body is affected.
Some general signs and symptoms associated with, but not specific to, cancer, include:
Fatigue
Lump or area of thickening that can be felt under the skin
Weight changes, including unintended loss or gain
Skin changes, such as yellowing, darkening or redness of the skin, sores that won't heal, or changes to existing moles
Changes in bowel or bladder habits
Persistent cough or trouble breathing
Difficulty swallowing
Hoarseness
Persistent indigestion or discomfort after eating
Persistent, unexplained muscle or joint pain
Persistent, unexplained fevers or night sweats
Unexplained bleeding or bruising
When to see a doctor
Make an appointment with your doctor if you have any persistent signs or symptoms that concern you.
If you don't have any signs or symptoms, but are worried about your risk of cancer, discuss your concerns with your doctor. Ask about which cancer screening tests and procedures are appropriate for you.
Request an appointment
Causes
Cancer is caused by changes (mutations) to the DNA within cells. The DNA inside a cell is packaged into a large number of individual genes, each of which contains a set of instructions telling the cell what functions to perform, as well as how to grow and divide. Errors in the instructions can cause the cell to stop its normal function and may allow a cell to become cancerous.
What do gene mutations do?
A gene mutation can instruct a healthy cell to:
Allow rapid growth.
A gene mutation can tell a cell to grow and divide more rapidly. This creates many new cells that all have that same mutation.
Fail to stop uncontrolled cell growth.
Normal cells know when to stop growing so that you have just the right number of each type of cell. Cancer cells lose the controls (tumor suppressor genes) that tell them when to stop growing. A mutation in a tumor suppressor gene allows cancer cells to continue growing and accumulating.
Make mistakes when repairing DNA errors.
DNA repair genes look for errors in a cell's DNA and make corrections. A mutation in a DNA repair gene may mean that other errors aren't corrected, leading cells to become cancerous.
These mutations are the most common ones found in cancer. But many other gene mutations can contribute to causing cancer.
What causes gene mutations?
Gene mutations can occur for several reasons, for instance:
Gene mutations you're born with.
You may be born with a genetic mutation that you inherited from your parents. This type of mutation accounts for a small percentage of cancers.
Gene mutations that occur after birth.
Most gene mutations occur after you're born and aren't inherited. A number of forces can cause gene mutations, such as smoking, radiation, viruses, cancer-causing chemicals (carcinogens), obesity, hormones, chronic inflammation and a lack of exercise.
Gene mutations occur frequently during normal cell growth. However, cells contain a mechanism that recognizes when a mistake occurs and repairs the mistake. Occasionally, a mistake is missed. This could cause a cell to become cancerous.
How do gene mutations interact with each other?
The gene mutations you're born with and those that you acquire throughout your life work together to cause cancer.
For instance, if you've inherited a genetic mutation that predisposes you to cancer, that doesn't mean you're certain to get cancer. Instead, you may need one or more other gene mutations to cause cancer. Your inherited gene mutation could make you more likely than other people to develop cancer when exposed to a certain cancer-causing substance.
It's not clear just how many mutations must accumulate for cancer to form. It's likely that this varies among cancer types.
More Information
Cancer care at Mayo Clinic
Myths about cancer causes
Risk factors
While doctors have an idea of what may increase your risk of cancer, the majority of cancers occur in people who don't have any known risk factors. Factors known to increase your risk of cancer include:
Your age
Cancer can take decades to develop. That's why most people diagnosed with cancer are 65 or older. While it's more common in older adults, cancer isn't exclusively an adult disease — cancer can be diagnosed at any age.
Your habits
Certain lifestyle choices are known to increase your risk of cancer. Smoking, drinking more than one drink a day for women and up to two drinks a day for men, excessive exposure to the sun or frequent blistering sunburns, being obese, and having unsafe sex can contribute to cancer.
You can change these habits to lower your risk of cancer — though some habits are easier to change than others.
Your family history
Only a small portion of cancers are due to an inherited condition. If cancer is common in your family, it's possible that mutations are being passed from one generation to the next. You might be a candidate for genetic testing to see whether you have inherited mutations that might increase your risk of certain cancers. Keep in mind that having an inherited genetic mutation doesn't necessarily mean you'll get cancer.
Your health conditions
Some chronic health conditions, such as ulcerative colitis, can markedly increase your risk of developing certain cancers. Talk to your doctor about your risk.
Your environment
The environment around you may contain harmful chemicals that can increase your risk of cancer. Even if you don't smoke, you might inhale secondhand smoke if you go where people are smoking or if you live with someone who smokes. Chemicals in your home or workplace, such as asbestos and benzene, also are associated with an increased risk of cancer.
Complications
Cancer and its treatment can cause several complications, including:
Pain.
Pain can be caused by cancer or by cancer treatment, though not all cancer is painful. Medications and other approaches can effectively treat cancer-related pain.
Fatigue.
Fatigue in people with cancer has many causes, but it can often be managed. Fatigue associated with chemotherapy or radiation therapy treatments is common, but it's usually temporary.
Difficulty breathing.
Cancer or cancer treatment may cause a feeling of being short of breath. Treatments may bring relief.
Nausea.
Certain cancers and cancer treatments can cause nausea. Your doctor can sometimes predict if your treatment is likely to cause nausea. Medications and other treatments may help you prevent or decrease nausea.
Diarrhea or constipation.
Cancer and cancer treatment can affect your bowels and cause diarrhea or constipation.
Weight loss.
Cancer and cancer treatment may cause weight loss. Cancer steals food from normal cells and deprives them of nutrients. This is often not affected by how many calories or what kind of food is eaten; it's difficult to treat. In most cases, using artificial nutrition through tubes into the stomach or vein does not help change the weight loss.
Chemical changes in your body.
Cancer can upset the normal chemical balance in your body and increase your risk of serious complications. Signs and symptoms of chemical imbalances might include excessive thirst, frequent urination, constipation and confusion.
Brain and nervous system problems.
Cancer can press on nearby nerves and cause pain and loss of function of one part of your body. Cancer that involves the brain can cause headaches and stroke-like signs and symptoms, such as weakness on one side of your body.
Unusual immune system reactions to cancer.
In some cases the body's immune system may react to the presence of cancer by attacking healthy cells. Called paraneoplastic syndromes, these very rare reactions can lead to a variety of signs and symptoms, such as difficulty walking and seizures.
Cancer that spreads.
As cancer advances, it may spread (metastasize) to other parts of the body. Where cancer spreads depends on the type of cancer.
Cancer that returns.
Cancer survivors have a risk of cancer recurrence. Some cancers are more likely to recur than others. Ask your doctor about what you can do to reduce your risk of cancer recurrence. Your doctor may devise a follow-up care plan for you after treatment. This plan may include periodic scans and exams in the months and years after your treatment, to look for cancer recurrence.
Prevention
Doctors have identified several ways to reduce your risk of cancer, such as:
Stop smoking.
If you smoke, quit. If you don't smoke, don't start. Smoking is linked to several types of cancer — not just lung cancer. Stopping now will reduce your risk of cancer in the future.
Avoid excessive sun exposure.
Harmful ultraviolet (UV) rays from the sun can increase your risk of skin cancer. Limit your sun exposure by staying in the shade, wearing protective clothing or applying sunscreen.
Eat a healthy diet.
Choose a diet rich in fruits and vegetables. Select whole grains and lean proteins. Limit your intake of processed meats.
Exercise most days of the week.
Regular exercise is linked to a lower risk of cancer. Aim for at least 30 minutes of exercise most days of the week. If you haven't been exercising regularly, start out slowly and work your way up to 30 minutes or longer.
Maintain a healthy weight.
Being overweight or obese may increase your risk of cancer. Work to achieve and maintain a healthy weight through a combination of a healthy diet and regular exercise.
Drink alcohol in moderation, if you choose to drink.
If you choose to drink alcohol, do so in moderation. For healthy adults, that means up to one drink a day for women and up to two drinks a day for men.
Schedule cancer screening exams.
Talk to your doctor about what types of cancer screening exams are best for you based on your risk factors.
Ask your doctor about immunizations.
Certain viruses increase your risk of cancer. Immunizations may help prevent those viruses, including hepatitis B, which increases the risk of liver cancer, and human papillomavirus (HPV), which increases the risk of cervical cancer and other cancers. Ask your doctor whether immunization against these viruses is appropriate for you.
By Mayo Clinic Staff
Cancer care at Mayo Clinic
Request an appointment
Diagnosis & treatment
Nov. 19, 2024
Print
Living with cancer?
Connect with others like you for support and answers to your questions in the
Cancer support group
on Mayo Clinic Connect, a patient community.
Cancer Discussions
Anyone have experience with gastrointestinal stromal tumor (GIST)?
79 Replies
Sun, Feb 23, 2025
chevron-right
What brought you joy today?
257 Replies
Fri, Feb 21, 2025
chevron-right
Tested postive for Lynch Syndrome: Anyone have this?
49 Replies
Thu, Feb 20, 2025
chevron-right
See more discussions
Show references
Cancer. World Health Organization. https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/cancer. Accessed Feb. 16, 2021.
Cancer stat facts: Cancer of any site. National Cancer Institute Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results Program. https://seer.cancer.gov/statfacts/html/all.html. Accessed Feb. 16, 2021.
Symptoms of cancer. National Cancer Institute. https://www.cancer.gov/about-cancer/diagnosis-staging/symptoms. Accessed Feb. 16, 2021.
Rock CL, et al. American Cancer Society guideline for diet and physical activity for cancer prevention. CA: A Cancer Journal for Clinicians. 2020;doi:doi.org/10.3322/caac.21591.
Niederhuber JE, et al., eds. Genetic and epigenetic alterations in cancer. In: Abeloff's Clinical Oncology. 6th ed. Elsevier; 2020. https://www.clinicalkey.com. Accessed Dec. 4, 2020.
Ulcerative colitis. National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases. https://www.niddk.nih.gov/health-information/digestive-diseases/ulcerative-colitis/all-content. Accessed Feb. 16, 2021.
Paraneoplastic syndromes information page. National Institute of Neurological Disorder and Stroke. https://www.ninds.nih.gov/Disorders/All-Disorders/Paraneoplastic-Syndromes-Information-Page. Accessed Feb. 16, 2021.
Deng GE, et al. Evidence-based clinical practice guidelines for integrative oncology: Complementary therapies and botanicals. Journal of the Society for Integrative Oncology. 2009;7:85.
Taking time: Support for people with cancer. National Cancer Institute. https://www.cancer.gov/publications/patient-education/taking-time. Accessed Feb. 16, 2021.
The American Cancer Society, eds. The principles and drivers of cancer. In: The American Cancer Society's Principles of Oncology: Prevention to Survivorship. Wiley-Blackwell; 2018.
Hypercalcemia (high level of calcium in the blood). Merck Manual Consumer Edition. https://www.merckmanuals.com/home/hormonal-and-metabolic-disorders/electrolyte-balance/hypercalcemia-high-level-of-calcium-in-the-blood#. Accessed Feb. 16, 2021.
What is cancer? National Cancer Institute. https://www.cancer.gov/about-cancer/understanding/what-is-cancer. Accessed Feb. 16, 2021.
Cancer prevention overview (PDQ) — Health professional version. National Cancer Institute. https://www.cancer.gov/about-cancer/causes-prevention/hp-prevention-overview-pdq. Accessed Feb. 16, 2021.
The genetics of cancer. National Cancer Institute. https://www.cancer.gov/about-cancer/causes-prevention/genetics. Accessed Feb. 16, 2021.
Understanding cancer risk. Cancer.Net. https://www.cancer.net/navigating-cancer-care/prevention-and-healthy-living/understanding-cancer-risk. Accessed Feb. 16. 2021.
Cancer screening overview (PDQ) — Health professional version. National Cancer Institute. https://www.cancer.gov/about-cancer/screening/hp-screening-overview-pdq. Accessed Feb. 16, 2021.
How cancer is diagnosed. National Cancer Institute. https://www.cancer.gov/about-cancer/diagnosis-staging/diagnosis. Accessed Feb. 16, 2021.
Cancer staging. National Cancer Institute. https://www.cancer.gov/about-cancer/diagnosis-staging/staging. Accessed Feb. 16, 2021.
Making decisions about cancer treatment. Cancer.Net. https://www.cancer.net/navigating-cancer-care/how-cancer-treated/making-decisions-about-cancer-treatment. Accessed Feb. 16, 2021.
How cancer is treated. Cancer.Net. https://www.cancer.net/navigating-cancer-care/how-cancer-treated. Accessed Feb. 16, 2021.
Related
Absolute risk
Adjuvant therapy for cancer
Atypical cells: Are they cancer?
Biopsy procedures
Cancer blood tests
Cancer diagnosis: 11 tips for coping
Cancer pain: Relief is possible
Cancer risk: What the numbers mean
Cancer surgery
Cancer survival rate
Cancer survivors: Care for your body after treatment
Cancer survivors: Late effects of cancer treatment
Cancer survivors: Managing your emotions after cancer treatment
Cancer treatment myths
Cancer-related diarrhea
Cancer-related fatigue
Chemotherapy side effects: A cause of heart disease?
Curcumin: Can it slow cancer growth?
Eating during cancer treatment: Tips to make food tastier
Heart cancer: Is there such a thing?
High-dose vitamin C: Can it kill cancer cells?
How cancer spreads
Image-guided needle biopsy
Infographic: Cancer Clinical Trials Offer Many Benefits
Low blood counts
Monoclonal antibody drugs
Mort Crim and Cancer
Mouth sores caused by cancer treatment: How to cope
Myths about cancer causes
No appetite? How to get nutrition during cancer treatment
PICC line placement
Punch biopsy
Relative risk
Self-Image During Cancer
Small cell, large cell cancer: What this means
Tumor vs. cyst: What's the difference?
What does cancer look like?
When cancer returns: How to cope with cancer recurrence
Show more related content
Associated Procedures
Biological therapy for cancer
Bone marrow transplant
Bone scan
Cancer treatment
Chemotherapy
Complete blood count (CBC)
CT scan
Intensity-modulated radiation therapy (IMRT)
MRI
Needle biopsy
Palliative care
Radiation therapy
Ultrasound
X-ray
Show more associated procedures
News from Mayo Clinic
World Cancer Day 2025: People with cancer are 'united by unique'
Feb. 04, 2025, 02:02 p.m.  CDT
Mayo Clinic Laboratories and Lucence announce strategic collaboration to enhance cancer testing services
Jan. 10, 2025, 06:30 p.m.  CDT
Top cancer research stories of 2024
Dec. 31, 2024, 03:30 p.m.  CDT
10 Mayo Clinic research advances in 2024, spanning stem cell therapy in space to growing mini-organs
Dec. 30, 2024, 04:00 p.m.  CDT
Mayo Clinic Minute: The right way to talk with someone who has cancer
Dec. 20, 2024, 04:55 p.m.  CDT
Mayo researchers study stool to unlock microbiome's role in cancer treatment
Nov. 12, 2024, 01:30 p.m.  CDT
Mayo Clinic Minute: Health screenings in underserved populations
Oct. 14, 2024, 03:23 p.m.  CDT
Profiling health in extraterrestrial space travel
Sept. 04, 2024, 02:30 p.m.  CDT
ARPA-H lends award to project to develop precision surgical tools for cancer care
Aug. 13, 2024, 09:00 p.m.  CDT
Supporting your child's development after a cancer diagnosis
Aug. 04, 2024, 11:00 a.m.  CDT
Tomorrow's Cure: How personalized vaccines combat cancer
July 24, 2024, 12:00 p.m.  CDT
Caring for your psychological needs as an adolescent or young adult cancer survivor
July 21, 2024, 11:00 a.m.  CDT
Mayo Clinic study uncovers genetic cancer risks in 550 patients
July 17, 2024, 02:30 p.m.  CDT
Tomorrow's Cure: How nuclear medicine helps cancer patients
July 17, 2024, 11:00 a.m.  CDT
Can you prevent cancer with lifestyle changes?
July 12, 2024, 03:12 p.m.  CDT
Tomorrow's Cure: How DNA guides cancer detection
July 10, 2024, 12:46 p.m.  CDT
Mayo Clinic Minute: Preventing cancer for future generations of Black families
June 17, 2024, 03:00 p.m.  CDT
Mayo Clinic Minute: Coping with cancer-related fatigue
June 13, 2024, 04:09 p.m.  CDT
Ultra-clean rooms are shaping the next generation of biotherapeutics
June 04, 2024, 01:00 p.m.  CDT
Mayo Clinic Comprehensive Cancer Center to highlight key studies at ASCO 2024
May 30, 2024, 10:36 p.m.  CDT
Clinical trials: A significant part of cancer care
May 19, 2024, 11:00 a.m.  CDT
Mayo researchers invented a new class of AI to improve cancer research and treatments
March 11, 2024, 02:55 p.m.  CDT
World Cancer Day: Making a commitment to close the cancer care gap
Feb. 04, 2024, 12:00 p.m.  CDT
Mayo Clinic Minute: Closing the gaps in cancer care
Feb. 02, 2024, 05:30 p.m.  CDT
Highlights of Mayo Clinic research advancements in 2023
Jan. 01, 2024, 03:00 p.m.  CDT
Mayo Clinic Comprehensive Cancer Center highlights research advances in 2023
Dec. 21, 2023, 10:19 p.m.  CDT
Unleashing viruses aimed at killing cancer
Nov. 25, 2023, 12:00 p.m.  CDT
Telehealth's lasting impact on cancer care delivery
Nov. 22, 2023, 02:05 p.m.  CDT
Mayo Clinic and Oxford Nanopore announce collaboration to advance precision medicine for cancer and genetic disorders
Oct. 19, 2023, 02:07 p.m.  CDT
Mayo Clinic Q&A: How to manage dry mouth during cancer care
Sept. 15, 2023, 01:30 p.m.  CDT
Mayo Clinic Q and A: Tips for cancer patients to stay safe in the summer
Aug. 02, 2023, 02:00 p.m.  CDT
Mayo Clinic Minute: Is there a connection between ultraprocessed food and cancer?
July 25, 2023, 03:00 p.m.  CDT
Mayo Clinic Minute: Plant-based diet is encouraged for patients with cancer
July 11, 2023, 03:45 p.m.  CDT
Mayo Clinic researchers pioneer AI method to predict how cells are organized in disease microenvironments
June 23, 2023, 03:00 p.m.  CDT
Mayo Clinic expert addresses cancer disparities during Black Family Cancer Awareness Week
June 19, 2023, 05:33 p.m.  CDT
Is a cancer clinical trial right for me?
June 16, 2023, 01:00 p.m.  CDT
Science Saturday: Pharmacists play key role in clinical research
June 03, 2023, 11:00 a.m.  CDT
Nucleus RadioPharma to open manufacturing facility in Rochester, Minnesota
May 09, 2023, 03:08 p.m.  CDT
Science Saturday: Study suggests chromosomal errors may hinder some aggressive tumors
April 22, 2023, 11:00 a.m.  CDT
Science Saturday: Igniting the interest of young cancer researchers
April 01, 2023, 11:00 a.m.  CDT
Show more news from Mayo Clinic
Products & Services
A Book: Live Younger Longer
A Book: Mayo Clinic Family Health Book
Assortment of Pill Aids from Mayo Clinic Store
Newsletter: Mayo Clinic Health Letter — Digital Edition
Show more products and services from Mayo Clinic
Cancer
Symptoms
&
causes
Diagnosis
&
treatment
Doctors
&
departments
Care at
Mayo
Clinic
Advertisement
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Advertising & Sponsorship
Policy
Opportunities
Ad Choices
Mayo Clinic Press
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from
Mayo Clinic Press
.
NEW: Mayo Clinic Guide to Better Sleep - Mayo Clinic Press
NEW: Mayo Clinic Guide to Better Sleep
Listen to Health Matters Podcast - Mayo Clinic Press
Listen to Health Matters Podcast
Mayo Clinic on Incontinence - Mayo Clinic Press
Mayo Clinic on Incontinence
The Essential Diabetes Book - Mayo Clinic Press
The Essential Diabetes Book
FREE Mayo Clinic Diet Assessment - Mayo Clinic Press
FREE Mayo Clinic Diet Assessment
Mayo Clinic Health Letter - FREE book - Mayo Clinic Press
Mayo Clinic Health Letter - FREE book
CON-20370569
Patient Care & Health Information
Diseases & Conditions
Cancer
